update TiDB roadmap (#3670)
pingcap/docs: roadmap.md

---
title: TiDB Roadmap
aliases: ['/docs/ROADMAP/','/docs/roadmap/']
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD001 -->

# TiDB Roadmap

## Improve system stability

- [ ] Create bindings for `UPDATE`/`DELETE`/`INSERT` queries.
- [ ] Optimize the pessimistic transaction model when DDL and DML statements are executed at the same time to improve system stability.
- [ ] Reduce latency jitter.

## Improve system performance and reduce latency

- [ ] Optimize the performance and efficiency of bulk deletion.
- [ ] Improve memory management.

> - [ ] Improve the accuracy and robustness of index selection.

Reviewer: It's better to put this to the `Improve system stability` section.

- [ ] Improve the performance of partition pruning and data access on the partitioned table.
- [ ] Asynchronous commit.

> - [ ] Clustered Index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Clustered Primary Index.
```

Author: Clustered Index is a proper noun, which needs to be reinterpreted after revision.

> - [ ] Support cross-region deployment and geo-partition.

Reviewer: We can split it into three subtasks:

- support joint consensus (availability)
- support defining placement rule in SQL (new feature)
- support Region Local TS Allocator (performance and reduce latency)

Author: The reason?

Reviewer: It makes this item more clearly to the user. Multi-Region deployment is ambiguous, different people have different understandings.

Author: It was thought that only the important ones would do, and the details could be left out.

## Improve system security

### Authentication

- [ ] Transport Layer Security(TLS) for TiFlash.
- [ ] TLS for internal communication in the TiDB cluster.
- [ ] SSH LDAP extension for TiUP.

### Transparent Data Encryption (TDE)

- [ ] Transparent Data Encryption (TDE) for TiFlash.
- [ ] Transparent Data Encryption (TDE) for PD.

### Mask

- [ ] Desensitize the TiDB general log.

## Cost-effectiveness

- [ ] Optimize the performance and stability of TiDB running on AWS i3.xlarge/i3.2xlarge.
- [ ] Optimize the performance and stability of TiDB running on non-NVMe SSD or on cloud disk (such as AWS EBS gp2).

> - [ ] Easier to discover performance issues and diagnose the causes.

Reviewer: How about moving it to another section like `Easier Diagnosis`

> ## New features

Reviewer: how about collecting the features related to data migration to another section?

Author: The reason?

---

> title: TiDB  Roadmap

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: TiDB Roadmap
```

> category: Roadmap

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

- [ ] Improve partition pruning and data access performance on the partition table.
- [ ] Async Commit.
- [ ] Clustered Index.
- [ ] Support Cross-Region Deployment & Geo-Partition.

## Improve System Security

### Authentication

- [ ] Transport Layer Security(TLS) for TiFlash.
- [ ] TLS in the internal communication of TiDB cluster.
- [ ] SSH LDAP extension for TiUP

### Transparent Data Encryption(TDE)

- [ ] Transparent Data Encryption(TDE) for TiFlash.
- [ ] Transparent Data Encryption(TDE) for PD.

### Mask

- [ ] De-Sensitization TiDB General Log.

## Cost-Effective

- [ ] Optimize the performance and stability of TiDB running on AWS i3.xlarge/i3.2xlarge.
- [ ] Optimize the performance and stability of TiDB running on No-NVME SSD or Cloud disk (like AWS EBS gp2).
- [ ] Easier discover performance issues and diagnose causes.

## New Feature

- [ ] Point-in-Time Recovery.
- [ ] Changing Column Types.
- [ ] Auto-Scaling on DBaaS.
- [ ] Support collation `utf8mb4_unicode_ci` and `utf8_unicode_ci`.
- [ ] Make TiCDC a complete alternative to TiDB-Binlog.
    - [ ] Support distinguish update and insert in a row changed event.

>     - [ ] Support to provide old values in the row changed event, including old values in delete or update SQL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - [ ] Support providing old values in the row changed event, including old values before the `DELETE` or `UPDATE` execution.
```

> - [ ] snapshot level consistent replication in disasters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Support snapshot-level consistent replication for disaster recovery
```

>     - [ ] Support MySQL sink can replicate to a snapshot level consistent state when upstream meets a disaster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - [ ] Support MySQL sink in replicating the upstream to a snapshot-level consistent state when the upstream meets a disaster.
```

> - [ ] Management TiCDC by SQL statements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Manage TiCDC using SQL statements.
```

> - [ ] Management TiCDC by API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Manage TiCDC using API.
```

> - [ ] SQL based import command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Support the SQL-based `import` command.
```

- [ ] Support Avro sink and make TiCDC compatible with Kafka connect.

> - [ ] Support Spark-3.0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Support Spark 3.0.
```

> - [ ] Support `EXCEPT`/`INTERSECT` Operators.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Support `EXCEPT`/`INTERSECT` operations.
```

- [ ] Direct write into TiFlash without going through TiKV.

> - [ ] TiUP/Operator deployment and management DM 2.0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Deploy and manage DM 2.0 using TiUP/TiDB Operator.
```

> - [ ] TiDB Operator deploying one TiDB Cluster across multiple regions or data centers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] TiDB Operator supports deploying one TiDB cluster across multiple regions or data centers.
```

> - [ ] TiDB Operator supports heterogeneous design

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] TiDB Operator supports heterogeneous design.
```

> - [ ] Support the migration of RDS (for example: MySQL/Aurora) on the cloud to TiDB.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Support migrating the RDS (such as MySQL/Aurora) on cloud to TiDB.
```
